RFC: Hash-based routing (#1222)
cloudfoundry/community: toc/rfc/rfc-draft-hash-based-routing.md

Author: Good point. Done

This one is used to compute a hash value, which will serve as the basis for routing decisions.

In the previously mentioned scenario, the tenant ID acts as the identifier included in the header and serves as the basis 
for hash calculation. This hash value determines the appropriate application instance for each request, ensuring that 
all requests with this identifier are consistently routed to the same instance or might be routed to another instance 
when the instance is saturated. Consequently, this load balancing algorithm effectively minimizes database connection 
overhead and optimizes connection pooling, enhancing efficiency and system performance.

### Requirements

#### Only Application Per-Route Load Balancing
The hash-based load balancing will be configured exclusively as an application per-route option and will not be available as a global setting.

#### Minimal rehashing over all Gorouter VMs
Rehashing should be minimized, especially when the number of application instances changes over time.

[Maglev hashing](https://storage.googleapis.com/gweb-research2023-media/pubtools/2904.pdf) can be considered as a possible solution.

> N hashes can be associated with one application instance. The number of hashes is a multiple of the number of application instances. 

Author: Reworked.

> N hashes can be associated with one application instance. The number of hashes is a multiple of the number of application instances. 

Author: I would avoid explaining the maglev hashing as it is more of an implementation detail, such as how it will be implemented on the Gorouter side. It is still open whether the maglev hashing will be used for that.

Example:

| Application instance | Current request count	 | Request count / average load |
|----------------------|------------------------|------------------------------|
| app_instance1        | 10                     | 20%                          |
| app_instance2        | 50                     | 100%                         |
| app_instance3        | 90                     | 180%                         |

Based on the average load of 50 requests, new requests to app_instance3 must be distributed to different application instances that are not overloaded.

#### Deterministic handling of overflow traffic to the next application instance
The application instance is considered overloaded when the current request load of this application exceeds the balance factor. Overflow traffic should always be directed to the same next instance rather than to a random one.

A possible presentation of deterministic handling can be a ring like:

![](rfc-draft-hash-based-routing/HashRing.drawio.png)

### Required Changes

#### Gorouter
- The Gorouter MUST be extended to take a specific identifier via request header

> - The Gorouter MUST implement a new `EndpointIterator` to calculate hash, based on the provided header 

Author: I changed it to be more abstract.

- The Gorouter MUST update its local hash cache following the registration or deregistration of an endpoint, ensuring minimal rehashing

#### Cloud Controller
- The `loadbalancing` property of the [route object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object) MUST be updated to include `hash` as an acceptable value
- The [route object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object) MUST 
include two new properties, `hash_header` and `hash_balance`, to configure a request header as the hashing key and the balance factor
- The CF API MUST implement the validation of the following requirements:
  - The `hash_header` property is mandatory when load balancing is set to hash
  - The `hash_balance` property is optional when load balancing is set to hash. Leaving out `hash_balance` means the load situation will not be considered
  - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation phase, the values will be evaluated to identify the best fit for the recommended range

>   - For load balancing algorithms other than hash, the `hash_balance` and `hash_header` properties SHOULD not be set

Author: I would keep this point with MUST.

supports the use of `--option KEY=VALUE`, where the key and value are sent directly to CC for validation. Consequently, 
the `create-route`, `update-route`, and `map-route` commands require no modifications, as they already accept the proposed properties.
Example: 
```bash
cf create-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_balance=125
cf map-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
```

#### BBS
The route object is maintained as a generic JSON object in the BBS, likely because the BBS doesn't use the route 
information itself. Therefore, it simply accepts and stores the route options provided by the Cloud Controller.

#### Route-Emitter
The options are raw JSON and will be passed directly to the Gorouter without any modifications.

#### Route-Registrar

> No use cases are known to implement hash-based routing for the platform-related routes. 

Reviewer: Maybe a rewording helps? I agree on not including it in the "MVP" that is implemented via this RFC. Would be open to re-discuss if the panel/reviwers come up with use-cases
```suggestion
In the scope of this RFC, it is not planned to implement hash-based routing in route-registrar for platform-routes.
```

> No use cases are known to implement hash-based routing for the platform-related routes. 

Author: @plowin Thank you for the suggestion. I applied it.

# Meta

[meta]: #meta

> - Name: Hash-based routing

Reviewer 2: one more thing: can we have the title a bit more extensive?

e.g. `Adding a hash-based load balancing algorithm for CF Routing` or something like that?

Author: I change the title.

each application instance, which then creates connection pools to every customer database. As a result, all tenants
might span up a full mesh, leading to too many open connections to the customer databases, impacting performance. This
limitation highlights a gap in achieving efficient load distribution, particularly when dealing with limited or
memory-intensive resources in backend services, and can be addressed through hash-based routing.

## Proposal

We propose introducing hash-based routing as a load balancing algorithm for use on a per-route basis to address the
issues described in the earlier scenario.

The approach leverages an HTTP header, which is associated with each incoming request and contains the specific
identifier. This one is used to compute a hash value, which will serve as the basis for routing decisions.

In the previously mentioned scenario, the tenant ID acts as the identifier included in the header and serves as the
basis for hash calculation. This hash value determines the appropriate application instance for each request, ensuring
that all requests with this identifier are consistently routed to the same instance or might be routed to another

> instance when the instance is saturated. Consequently, this load balancing algorithm effectively minimizes database

Author: You are right. I rewrote the text to express it in the right way.

connection overhead and optimizes connection pooling, enhancing efficiency and system performance.

### Requirements

#### Only Application Per-Route Load Balancing

The hash-based load balancing will be configured exclusively as an application per-route option and will not be
available as a global setting.

#### Minimal rehashing over all Gorouter VMs

Rehashing should be minimized, especially when the number of application instances changes over time.

[Maglev hashing](https://storage.googleapis.com/gweb-research2023-media/pubtools/2904.pdf) can be considered as a
possible solution.

N hashes can be associated with one application instance. The number of hashes is a multiple of the number of
application instances.

#### Considering a balance factor

Before routing a request, the current load on each application instance must be evaluated using a balance factor. This
load is measured by the number of in-flight requests. For example, with a balance factor of 150, no application instance

> should exceed 150% of the average load across all instances. Consequently, requests must be distributed to different

Author: @peanball Do you mean to replace "average load across all instances" -> "average number of in-flight requests across all application instances"?

> application instances that are not overloaded.

Author: I rephrased this sentence to avoid the word "overloaded" here. In the next paragraph, we are introducing the meaning of overloaded in the context of this RFC, like "The application instance is considered overloaded when the current request load of this application exceeds the balance factor."

Example:

| Application instance | Current request count | Request count / average load |
|----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------|
| app_instance1        | 10                    | 20%                          |
| app_instance2        | 50                    | 100%                         |
| app_instance3        | 90                    | 180%                         |

Based on the average load of 50 requests, new requests to app_instance3 must be distributed to different application
instances that are not overloaded.

#### Deterministic handling of overflow traffic to the next application instance

The application instance is considered overloaded when the current request load of this application exceeds the balance
factor. Overflow traffic should always be directed to the same next instance rather than to a random one.

> A possible presentation of deterministic handling can be a ring like:

Reviewer 3: Round-robin with a dynamically extended ring of app instances. Here we get the disadvantages of round-robin.  
Appropriate variations could be:
1. the least-connection within a set of instances, 
2. applying least-connection only to select the app instance to extend the ring of app instances, if all the app instances in the ring are overloaded, or 
3. applying least connection for both cases (within the set and to extend the set).

> A possible presentation of deterministic handling can be a ring like:

Reviewer 4: > This is similar to round-robin, but the "starting point" is always the hash's target instance, right?

Yes, another difference is that the order of instance can be unique based on the incoming value (but it doesn't have to be).

- Gorouters SHOULD NOT implement a shared hash cache across instances in the same deployment
- The Gorouter MUST assess the current request load across all application instances mapped to a particular route in
  order to prevent overload situations
- The Gorouter MUST update its local hash table following the registration or deregistration of an endpoint, ensuring
  minimal rehashing

#### Cloud Controller

- The `loadbalancing` property of
  the [route object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object) MUST be
  updated to include `hash` as an acceptable value
- The [route options object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object)
  MUST include two new properties, `hash_header` and `hash_balance`, to configure a request header as the hashing key
  and the balance factor
- It MUST implement the validation of the following requirements:
    - The `hash_header` property is mandatory when load balancing is set to hash
    - The `hash_balance` property is optional when load balancing is set to hash. Leaving out `hash_balance` means the
      load situation will not be considered

>     - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation

Reviewer 4: This is strongly inspired by this: https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/configuration.html#4.2-hash-balance-factor.

I don't really get your explanation but this is how it works: It is only relative to the average load across all instances. Essentially avg. load = 100% and when you specify 120% you allow instances to have up to 120% of the average load but not more.

>     - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation

Reviewer 2: That's great. Maybe we can link the source of inspiration then?

The HAProxy definition is also all over the place. A "factor" is an operand in a multiplication. They also don't use the "%" sign to indicate that it's not a factor of 125 but 125%, so 1.25. I would have the same comments to the HAProxy description to be honest.

For consistency we can keep it the same, but then also like to the place that we're consistent with (i.e. the HAProxy docs).

>     - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation

Reviewer 2: My preference is actually on the "overcommit" / allowed imbalance, so 25% "more", not 125% of the whole.

HAProxy docs would only make sense to link if we stick with exactly their semantics. From what I read, we don't necessarily want that, so the link to HAProxy doesn't make sense. Fully agree.

>     - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation

Reviewer 5: @b1tamara Can we resolve this discussion?

>     - To account for overload situations, `hash_balance` values should be greater than 110. During the implementation

Author: I like the idea of considering `hash_balance` as a factor and allowing a float number for that, like 1.25. Adapted RFC examples for that.

      phase, the values will be evaluated to identify the best fit for the recommended range
    - For load balancing algorithms other than hash, the `hash_balance` and `hash_header` properties MUST not be set

An example for manifest with these properties:

```yaml
version: 1
applications:
  - name: test
    routes:
      - route: test.example.com
        options:
          loadbalancing: hash
          hash_header: tenant-id
          hash_balance: 125
      - route: anothertest.example.com
        options:
          loadbalancing: least-connection
```

The decision to introduce plain keys was influenced by the following points:

- Simple to use
- It allows for easy addition of more load-balancing-related properties if new requirements arise in the future
- It complies with

>   the [RFC](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/community/blob/main/toc/rfc/rfc-0027-generic-per-route-features.md#proposal),

Author: Done

  which states that the map must use strings as keys and can use numbers, strings, and the literals true and false as
  values

### No Changes Required

#### CF cli

The [current implementation of route option](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/cli/blob/main/resources/options_resource.go)
supports the use of `--option KEY=VALUE`, where the key and value are sent directly to CC for validation. Consequently,
the `create-route`, `update-route`, and `map-route` commands require no modifications, as they already accept the
proposed properties.
Example:

```bash
cf create-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id
cf update-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_balance=125
cf map-route MY-APP example.com -n test -o loadbalancing=hash -o hash_header=tenant-id -o hash_balance=125
```

#### BBS

> The route object is maintained as a generic JSON object in the BBS, likely because the BBS doesn't use the route

Author: I removed the paragraph about BBS from the RFC.

information itself. Therefore, it simply accepts and stores the route options provided by the Cloud Controller.

#### Route-Emitter

The options are raw JSON and will be passed directly to the Gorouter without any modifications.

#### Route-Registrar

In the scope of this RFC, it is not planned to implement hash-based routing in route-registrar for platform-routes.

### Diagrams

#### An activity diagram for routing decision for an incoming request

![](rfc-draft-hash-based-routing/ActivityDiagram.drawio.png)

#### A simplified activity diagram for Gorouter's endpoint registration process

> ![](rfc-draft-hash-based-routing/EndpointRegistration.drawio.png)

Reviewer 2: Right column, first box says "Reguster", should say "Register".

Condition decision (yes, no) labels missing in the one 'if' in the diagram.

result, new requests to app_instance3 must be distributed to different application instances.

#### Deterministic handling of overflow traffic to the next application instance

The application instance is considered overloaded when the current request load of this application exceeds the balance
factor. Overflow traffic should always be directed to the same next instance rather than to a random one.

A possible presentation of deterministic handling can be a ring like:

![](rfc-draft-hash-based-routing/HashRing.drawio.png)

### Required Changes

#### Gorouter

- Gorouter MUST be extended to take a specific identifier via the request header
- Gorouter MUST implement hash calculation, based on the provided header
- Gorouter SHOULD store the mapping between computed hash values and application instances locally to avoid
  expensive recalculations for each incoming request
- Gorouters SHOULD NOT implement a distributed shared cache
- Gorouter MUST assess the current number of in-flight requests across all application instances mapped to a
  particular route to consider overload situations

> - Gorouter MUST update its local hash table following the registration or deregistration of an endpoint, ensuring
>   minimal rehashing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Gorouter MUST update its local hash table following the registration or deregistration of an endpoint, ensuring
  minimal rehashing
- Gorouter SHOULD NOT not incur any performance hit when 0 apps use hash routing.
```

Author: Good point!

For a detailed understanding of the workflows on Gorouter's side, please refer to the [activity diagrams](#diagrams).

#### Cloud Controller

- The `loadbalancing` property of
  the [route object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object) MUST be
  updated to include `hash` as an acceptable value
- The [route options object](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.190.0/index.html#the-route-options-object)
  MUST include two new properties, `hash_header` and `hash_balance`, to configure a request header as the hashing key
  and the balance factor
- It MUST implement the validation of the following requirements:
    - The `hash_header` property is mandatory when load balancing is set to hash

>     - The `hash_balance` property is optional when load balancing is set to hash. Leaving out `hash_balance` means the

Author: I might have removed accidentally that hash_balance: 0 will unset the property, and in this case, the overflow situation will not be considered. I will add it here.

>     - The `hash_balance` property is optional when load balancing is set to hash. Leaving out `hash_balance` means the

Reviewer 5: @b1tamara can we resolve this?

>     - The `hash_balance` property is optional when load balancing is set to hash. Leaving out `hash_balance` means the

Author: Added a sentence about setting it to 0.
